SOURCE_ID: imf-genai-work
AUTHOR: Mauro Cazzaniga, Florence Jaumotte, Longji Li, Giovanni Melina, Augustus J. Panton, Carlo Pizzinelli, Emma J. Rockall, Marina Mendes Tavares (IMF)
TITLE: Gen-AI: Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Work (Staff Discussion Note SDN/2024/001)
YEAR: 2024
TYPE: report
URL: https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Staff-Discussion-Notes/Issues/2024/01/14/Gen-AI-Artificial-Intelligence-and-the-Future-of-Work-542379
NOTE: PARTIAL - Executive summary, introduction excerpt, and the model-based Section IV on income and wealth inequality captured verbatim from the official PDF; empirical Sections II-III, Section V (AI preparedness), boxes, annexes and references abridged/omitted.
====

OFFICIAL SUMMARY
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has the potential to reshape the global economy, especially in the realm of labor markets. Advanced economies will experience the benefits and pitfalls of AI sooner than emerging market and developing economies, largely due to their employment structure focused on cognitive-intensive roles. There are some consistent patterns concerning AI exposure, with women and college-educated individuals more exposed but also better poised to reap AI benefits, and older workers potentially less able to adapt to the new technology. Labor income inequality may increase if the complementarity between AI and high-income workers is strong, while capital returns will increase wealth inequality. However, if productivity gains are sufficiently large, income levels could surge for most workers. In this evolving landscape, advanced economies and more developed emerging markets need to focus on upgrading regulatory frameworks and supporting labor reallocation, while safeguarding those adversely affected. Emerging market and developing economies should prioritize developing digital infrastructure and digital skills.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Artificial intelligence (AI) is set to profoundly change the global economy, with some commentators seeing it as akin to a new industrial revolution. Its consequences for economies and societies remain hard to foresee. This is especially evident in the context of labor markets, where AI promises to increase productivity while threatening to replace humans in some jobs and to complement them in others.

Almost 40 percent of global employment is exposed to AI, with advanced economies at greater risk but also better poised to exploit AI benefits than emerging market and developing economies. In advanced economies, about 60 percent of jobs are exposed to AI, due to prevalence of cognitive-task-oriented jobs. A new measure of potential AI complementarity suggests that, of these, about half may be negatively affected by AI, while the rest could benefit from enhanced productivity through AI integration. Overall exposure is 40 percent in emerging market economies and 26 percent in low-income countries. Although many emerging market and developing economies may experience less immediate AI-related disruptions, they are also less ready to seize AI's advantages. This could exacerbate the digital divide and cross-country income disparity.

AI will affect income and wealth inequality. Unlike previous waves of automation, which had the strongest effect on middle-skilled workers, AI displacement risks extend to higher-wage earners. However, potential AI complementarity is positively correlated with income. Hence, the effect on labor income inequality depends largely on the extent to which AI displaces or complements high-income workers. Model simulations suggest that, with high complementarity, higher-wage earners can expect a more-than-proportional increase in their labor income, leading to an increase in labor income inequality. This would amplify the increase in income and wealth inequality that results from enhanced capital returns that accrue to high earners. Countries' choices regarding the definition of AI property rights, as well as redistributive and other fiscal policies, will ultimately shape its impact on income and wealth distribution.

The gains in productivity, if strong, could result in higher growth and higher incomes for most workers. Owing to capital deepening and a productivity surge, AI adoption is expected to boost total income. If AI strongly complements human labor in certain occupations and the productivity gains are sufficiently large, higher growth and labor demand could more than compensate for the partial replacement of labor tasks by AI, and incomes could increase along most of the income distribution.

College-educated workers are better prepared to move from jobs at risk of displacement to high-complementarity jobs; older workers may be more vulnerable to the AI-driven transformation. In the UK and Brazil, for instance, college-educated individuals historically moved more easily from jobs now assessed to have high displacement potential to those with high complementarity. In contrast, workers without postsecondary education show reduced mobility. Younger workers who are adaptable and familiar with new technologies may also be better able to leverage the new opportunities. In contrast, older workers may struggle with reemployment, adapting to technology, mobility, and training for new job skills.

To harness AI's potential fully, priorities depend on countries' development levels. A novel AI preparedness index shows that advanced and more developed emerging market economies should invest in AI innovation and integration, while advancing adequate regulatory frameworks... For all economies, social safety nets and retraining for AI-susceptible workers are crucial to ensure inclusivity.

I. INTRODUCTION (excerpt)
Artificial intelligence (AI) promises to boost productivity and growth, but its impact on economies and societies is uncertain, varying by job roles and sectors, with the potential to amplify disparities... Although AI holds the potential for production-oriented applications, its effect will likely be mixed. In some sectors where human oversight of AI is necessary, it could amplify worker productivity and labor demand. Conversely, in other sectors, AI might pave the way for significant job displacements. A rise in aggregate productivity of the economy could however strengthen overall economic demand, potentially creating more job opportunities for most workers in a ripple effect...

IV. MODEL ANALYSIS: AI, THE ECONOMY, AND INEQUALITY (excerpts)
[The section develops a task-based heterogeneous-agent model (Rockall, Pizzinelli, and Tavares, forthcoming; building on Moll, Rachel, and Restrepo 2022), calibrated to the United Kingdom,] highlighting three critical channels through which AI may affect [the economy]: (1) labor displacement, (2) complementarity, and (3) productivity gains... First, AI adoption may shift tasks previously performed by labor to AI capital, leading to a reduction in labor income. Second, AI adoption may increase the importance of tasks that are not displaced by AI, particularly in occupations with high complementarity between human labor and AI... Third, AI adoption may lead to broad-based productivity gains, boosting investment and increasing overall labor demand... As a result, the overall impact of AI on income levels and inequality will depend on the extent to which gains in economic activity generated by AI-induced productivity compensate for any labor income losses.

The impact of AI is simulated by building three scenarios, which assume a labor share decline in line with comparable historical episodes associated with automation [5.5 percentage points, as observed in the UK 1980-2014]: (1) low-complementarity; (2) high-complementarity; (3) high-complementarity and high productivity [productivity calibrated to ~1.5pp higher average annual productivity growth in the first 10 years after adoption].

The impact of AI on labor income inequality depends on the race between the degree of exposure to, and complementarity with, AI, and its boost to productivity. When AI has low complementarity with labor, AI adoption leads to a decline in labor income inequality because of the displacement effect [which hits top earners]. When AI is highly complementary to labor, the complementarity effect becomes stronger than the displacement effect, particularly in the upper half of the income distribution... As a consequence, labor income inequality increases. Last, when the AI productivity impact is also considered, labor income rises for all workers in the economy... The main reason is that higher productivity leads to higher demand for all factors of production in the economy, leading to increased labor income. However, labor income inequality rises because the increase is larger for workers with high AI complementarity.

Unlike labor income inequality, capital income and wealth inequality always increase with AI adoption. The main reason for the increase in capital income and wealth inequality is that AI leads to labor displacement and an increase in the demand for AI capital, increasing capital returns and asset holdings' value. In all scenarios, interest rates increase by almost 0.4 percentage point... Since in the model, as in the data, high-income workers hold a large share of assets, they benefit more from the rise in capital returns. As a result, in all scenarios, independent of the impact on labor income, the total income of top earners increases because of capital income gains. These model simulations abstract from possible changes in the definition of property rights, as well as changes in fiscal and redistributive policies, which can help reshape distributional outcomes.

Under the high-complementarity, high-productivity scenario, the increase in total national income is largest and benefits all workers, although gains for those at the top are larger. In the first scenario... output [increases] almost 10 percent thanks to a combination of capital deepening and a small increase in total factor productivity. [In the second scenario] total income levels of low-income workers decline by 2 percent, while the gains at the top are almost 8 percent... Last, when the productivity impact is also considered, output increases by 16 percent between steady states, and total factor productivity increases by almost 4 percent. These gains happen primarily in the first 10 years of the transition. Under this third scenario, despite the increase in labor income inequality, the total income level increases for all workers in the economy, ranging from 2 percent for low-income workers to almost 14 percent for high-income workers.

In emerging market and developing economies with higher initial inequality, AI could amplify wealth gaps and reduce wage disparity to a larger extent... Simulations suggest that higher initial income and wealth inequality could exacerbate wealth disparity, because AI-associated gains accrue predominantly to top earners...

CONCLUSIONS (excerpt)
...the trajectory of labor income inequality hinges on how well AI complements tasks undertaken by high-income professionals. Model simulations suggest that with strong complementarity, high-wage earners might experience a disproportionate increase in their earnings, thereby intensifying labor income inequality. This channel would amplify the increase in income and wealth inequality resulting from enhanced capital returns... Growing AI adoption has the potential to exacerbate cross-country and within-country inequality.
