SOURCE_ID: karpathy-dwarkesh
AUTHOR: Andrej Karpathy (interviewed by Dwarkesh Patel)
TITLE: Andrej Karpathy — Dwarkesh Podcast interview ("We're summoning ghosts, not building animals")
YEAR: 2025
TYPE: podcast
URL: https://www.dwarkesh.com/p/andrej-karpathy
NOTE: PARTIAL — full transcript obtained (~116k chars). Corpus stores the economics/jobs/automation portions relevant to income distribution: the "AGI will blend into 2% GDP growth" section and the "ASI / automation" section, plus the definition-of-AGI and autonomy-slider discussion. Non-economic portions (RL, model collapse, self-driving, education pedagogy, evolution) are omitted.

Episode summary (Dwarkesh): "Andrej explains why reinforcement learning is terrible (but everything else is much worse), why model collapse prevents LLMs from learning the way humans do, why AGI will just blend into the previous ~2.5 centuries of 2% GDP growth, why self driving took so long to crack, and what he sees as the future of education." Karpathy also frames this as "the decade of agents" (not the year of agents).
====

[On the "autonomy slider" — Karpathy on how automation proceeds:]

KARPATHY: We're abstracting ourselves very, very slowly. There's this what I call "autonomy slider," where more and more stuff is automated—of the stuff that can be automated at any point in time—and we're doing a bit less and less and raising ourselves in the layer of abstraction over the automation.

=== 01:06:25 – AGI will blend into 2% GDP growth ===

DWARKESH PATEL: People have proposed different ways of charting how much progress we've made towards full AGI... People have proposed it's the education level. We had a high schooler, and then they went to college with RL, and they're going to get a Ph.D.

KARPATHY: I don't like that one. [...] I'm almost tempted to reject the question entirely because I see this as an extension of computing. Have we talked about how to chart progress in computing... What is the y-axis? The whole question is funny from that perspective a little bit.

When people talk about AI and the original AGI and how we spoke about it when OpenAI started, AGI was a system you could go to that can do any economically valuable task at human performance or better. That was the definition. I was pretty happy with that at the time. I've stuck to that definition forever...

The first concession that people make all the time is they just take out all the physical stuff because we're just talking about digital knowledge work. That's a pretty major concession compared to the original definition... What fraction of the economy are we taking away by saying, "Oh, only knowledge work?" I don't know the numbers. I feel about 10% to 20%, if I had to guess, is only knowledge work... It's still a really large market... a few trillion dollars, even in the US, of market share or work.

[On which jobs get automated first:] Today, what jobs are replaceable by AI? A good example recently was Geoff Hinton's prediction that radiologists would not be a job anymore, and this turned out to be very wrong in a bunch of ways. Radiologists are alive and well and growing, even though computer vision is really, really good... It's just a messy, complicated job with a lot of surfaces and dealing with patients...

[Call center employees as the amenable early case:] Their jobs are pretty simple. It's a sequence of tasks, and every task looks similar... So I would be looking for those things. But even there, I'm not looking at full automation yet. I'm looking for an autonomy slider. I expect that we are not going to instantly replace people. We're going to be swapping in AIs that do 80% of the volume. They delegate 20% of the volume to humans, and humans are supervising teams of five AIs doing the call center work that's more rote... Then I would expect that across the economy. A lot of jobs are a lot harder than a call center employee.

DWARKESH PATEL: [On radiologists/Waymo analogy] ...if you automate 99% of a job, that last 1% the human has to do is incredibly valuable because it's bottlenecking everything else... their wages should go up tremendously because they're the one thing bottlenecking wide deployment... So you might see this thing where your wages go up until you get to 99% and then fall just like that when the last 1% is gone.

KARPATHY: That's an interesting question. I don't think we're currently seeing that with radiology... I would be a lot more interested in what's happening with call center employees today... I would still wait for a year or two because I would potentially expect them to pull back and rehire some of the people.

DWARKESH PATEL: [On the surprising concentration in coding] ...instead, if we do believe we're on the path of AGI with the current paradigm, the progression is very much not like that. It does not seem like consultants and accountants are getting huge productivity improvements. It's very much like programmers are getting more and more chiseled away at their work... this thing which is "general", which should be able to do any knowledge work, is just overwhelmingly doing only coding.

KARPATHY: I do believe coding is the perfect first thing for these LLMs and agents. That's because coding has always fundamentally worked around text... We also have a lot of infrastructure pre-built for handling code and text. [Contrast: slides, which are not text and lack pre-built diff infrastructure — much harder.]

=== 01:17:36 – ASI (superintelligence) ===

KARPATHY: I see it as a progression of automation in society. Extrapolating the trend of computing, there will be a gradual automation of a lot of things, and superintelligence will [be] an extrapolation of that. We expect more and more autonomous entities over time that are doing a lot of the digital work and then eventually even the physical work some amount of time later. Basically I see it as just automation, roughly speaking.

[On qualitative feel:] I think it will [feel different]. It is fundamentally automation, but it will be extremely foreign. It will look really strange... Some of the scenarios that I start to get nervous about... is this gradual loss of control and understanding of what's happening. I think that's the most likely outcome, that there will be a gradual loss of understanding. We'll gradually layer all this stuff everywhere, and there will be fewer and fewer people who understand it. Then there will be a gradual loss of control...

[If I were to write sci-fi novels] they would look along the lines of not even a single entity that takes over everything, but multiple competing entities that gradually become more and more autonomous. Some of them go rogue and the others fight them off...

[On intelligence explosion:] I do [expect a speed-up], but it's business as usual because we're in an intelligence explosion already and have been for decades. It's basically the GDP curve that is an exponential weighted sum over so many aspects of the industry. Everything is gradually being automated and has been for hundreds of years. The Industrial Revolution is automation... We've been recursively self-improving and exploding for a long time.

[On finding AI in GDP:] I was trying to find AI in the GDP for a while. I thought that GDP should go up. But then I looked at some of the other technologies that I thought were very transformative, like computers or mobile phones... You can't find them in GDP. GDP is the same exponential. [...] Everything is so spread out and it so slowly diffuses that everything ends up being averaged up into the same exponential...

With AI we're going to see the exact same thing. It's just more automation... it's going to diffuse over time, and it's still going to add up to the same exponential. We're still going to have an exponential that's going to get extremely vertical. It's going to be very foreign to live in that kind of an environment.

DWARKESH PATEL: Just to clarify, you're saying that the rate of growth will not change. The intelligence explosion will show up as it just enabled us to continue staying on the 2% growth trajectory...

KARPATHY: Yes, my expectation is that it stays in the same pattern.

DWARKESH PATEL: [Counter-argument] ...true AGI... is qualitatively different from these other productivity-improving technologies because it's labor itself. We live in a very labor-constrained world... if you have billions of extra people who are inventing stuff... It's as if you get 10 billion extra people on the planet.

KARPATHY: [Counterpoint] computing is labor. Computers, a lot of jobs disappeared because computers are automating a bunch of digital information processing... So computers are labor, and that has played out. Self-driving as an example is also computers doing labor. That's already been playing out. It's still business as usual.

[...] I do feel like people make this assumption of, "We have God in a box, and now it can do everything," and it just won't look like that. It's going to be able to do some of the things. It's going to fail at some other things. It's going to be gradually put into society, and we'll end up with the same pattern. That is my prediction. This assumption of suddenly having a completely intelligent, fully flexible, fully general human in a box... I don't think that we will have this discrete change. I think we'll arrive at the same kind of gradual diffusion of this across the industry.

[Rejecting the discrete-jump / 20% growth view:] I still think that you're presupposing some discrete jump. There's some unlock that we're waiting to claim. And suddenly we're going to have geniuses in data centers. I still think you're presupposing some discrete jump that has no historical precedent that I can't find in any of the statistics and that I think probably won't happen.
