SOURCE_ID: aghion-jones-jones
AUTHOR: Philippe Aghion, Benjamin F. Jones & Charles I. Jones
TITLE: Artificial Intelligence and Economic Growth
YEAR: 2017
TYPE: paper
URL: https://web.stanford.edu/~chadj/AI.pdf
NOTE: PARTIAL - abstract, introduction, and conclusion (Section 7) retained; model sections 2-6 and references omitted. Published in The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Agenda (NBER/University of Chicago Press, 2019).
====

Artificial Intelligence and Economic Growth
Philippe Aghion (College de France and LSE), Benjamin F. Jones (Northwestern and NBER), Charles I. Jones (Stanford GSB and NBER)
October 10, 2017 - Version 1.0

Abstract

This paper examines the potential impact of artificial intelligence (A.I.) on economic growth. We model A.I. as the latest form of automation, a broader process dating back more than 200 years. Electricity, internal combustion engines, and semiconductors facilitated automation in the last century, but A.I. now seems poised to automate many tasks once thought to be out of reach, from driving cars to making medical recommendations and beyond. How will this affect economic growth and the division of income between labor and capital? What about the potential emergence of "singularities" and "superintelligence," concepts that animate many discussions in the machine intelligence community? How will the linkages between A.I. and growth be mediated by firm-level considerations, including organization and market structure? The goal throughout is to refine a set of critical questions about A.I. and economic growth and to contribute to shaping an agenda for the field. One theme that emerges is based on Baumol's "cost disease" insight: growth may be constrained not by what we are good at but rather by what is essential and yet hard to improve.

1. Introduction

This paper considers the implications of artificial intelligence for economic growth. Artificial intelligence (A.I.) can be defined as "the capability of a machine to imitate intelligent human behavior" or "an agent's ability to achieve goals in a wide range of environments." These definitions immediately evoke fundamental economic issues. For example, what happens if A.I. allows an ever-increasing number of tasks previously performed by human labor to become automated? A.I. may be deployed in the ordinary production of goods and services, potentially impacting economic growth and income shares. But A.I. may also change the process by which we create new ideas and technologies, helping to solve complex problems and scaling creative effort. In extreme versions, some observers have argued that A.I. can become rapidly self-improving, leading to "singularities" that feature unbounded machine intelligence and/or unbounded economic growth in finite time (Good (1965), Vinge (1993), Kurzweil (2005)). Nordhaus (2015) provides a detailed overview and discussion of the prospects for a singularity from the standpoint of economics.

In this paper, we speculate on how A.I. may affect the growth process. Our primary goal is to help shape an agenda for future research. To do so, we focus on the following questions:

- If A.I. increases automation in the production of goods and services, how will it impact economic growth?
- Can we reconcile the advent of A.I. with the observed constancy in growth rates and capital share over most of the 20th century? Should we expect such constancy to persist in the 21st century?
- Do these answers change when A.I. and automation apply to the production of new ideas?
- Can A.I. drive massive increases in growth rates, or even a singularity, as some observers predict? Under what conditions, and are these conditions plausible?
- How are the links between A.I. and economic growth modulated by firm-level considerations, including market structure and innovation incentives? How does A.I. affect the internal organization of firms, and with what implications?

In thinking about these questions, we develop two main themes. First, we model A.I. as the latest form in a process of automation that has been ongoing for at least 200 years. From the spinning jenny to the steam engine to electricity to computer chips, the automation of aspects of production has been a key feature of economic growth since the Industrial Revolution. This perspective is taken explicitly in two key papers that we build upon, Zeira (1998) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2016). We view A.I. as a new form of automation that may allow tasks that were previously thought to be out of reach from automation to succumb. These tasks may be non-routine (to use the language of Autor, Levy and Murnane (2003)), like self-driving cars, or they may involve high levels of skill, such as legal services, radiology, and some forms of scientific lab-based research. An advantage of this approach is that it allows us to use historical experience on economic growth and automation to discipline our modeling of A.I.

A second theme that emerges in our paper is that the growth consequences of automation and A.I. may be constrained by Baumol's "cost disease." Baumol (1967) observed that sectors with rapid productivity growth, such as agriculture and even manufacturing today, often see their share of GDP decline while those sectors with relatively slow productivity growth — perhaps including many services — experience increases. As a consequence, economic growth may be constrained not by what we do well but rather by what is essential and yet hard to improve. We suggest that combining this feature of growth with automation can yield a rich description of the growth process, including consequences for future growth and income distribution. When applied to a model in which A.I. automates the production of goods and services, Baumol's insight generates sufficient conditions under which one can get overall balanced growth with a constant capital share that stays well below 100%, even with nearly complete automation. When applied to a model in which A.I. automates the production of ideas, these same considerations can prevent explosive growth. [Footnote: In the Appendix we show that if some steps in the innovation process require human R&D, A.I. could possibly slow or even end growth by exacerbating business-stealing, which in turn discourages human investments in innovation.]

[Sections 2-6: models of A.I. in goods production (Zeira automation with Baumol cost disease), A.I. in idea production, singularity analysis, firms and A.I. (market structure, organization), and sectoral evidence on capital shares - omitted.]

7. Conclusion

In this paper we discussed potential implications of A.I. for the growth process. We began by introducing A.I. in the production function of goods and services and tried to reconcile evolving automation with the observed stability in the capital share and per capita GDP growth over the last century. Our model, which introduces Baumol's "cost disease" insight into Zeira's model of automation, generates a rich set of possible outcomes. We thus derived sufficient conditions under which one can get overall balanced growth with a constant capital share that stays well below 100%, even with nearly complete automation. Essentially, Baumol's cost disease leads to a decline in the share of GDP associated with manufacturing or agriculture (once they are automated), but this is balanced by the increasing fraction of the economy that is automated over time. The labor share remains substantial because of Baumol's insight: growth is determined not by what we are good at but rather by what is essential and yet hard to improve. We also saw how this model can generate a prolonged period with high capital share and relatively low aggregate economic growth while automation keeps pushing ahead.

Next, we speculated on the effects of introducing A.I. in the production technology for new ideas. A.I. can potentially increase growth, either temporarily or permanently, depending on precisely how it is introduced. It is possible that ongoing automation can obviate the role of population growth in generating exponential growth as A.I. increasingly replaces people in generating ideas. Notably, in this paper, we've taken automation to be exogenous and the incentives for introducing A.I. in various places clearly can have first order effects. Exploring the details of endogenous automation and A.I. in this setup is a crucial direction for further research.

We then discussed the (theoretical) possibility that A.I. could generate some form of a singularity, perhaps even leading the economy to achieve infinite income in finite time. If the elasticity of substitution in combining tasks is less than one, this seems to require that all tasks be automated. But with Cobb-Douglas production, a singularity could occur even with less than full automation because the nonrivalry of knowledge gives rise to increasing returns. Nevertheless, here too the Baumol theme remains relevant: even if many tasks are automated, growth may remain limited due to areas that remain essential yet are hard to improve. Thus in the Appendix we show that if some steps in the innovation process require human R&D, then super A.I. may end up slowing or even ending growth by exacerbating business-stealing which in turn discourages human investments in innovation. Such possibilities, as well as other implications of "super-A.I." (for example for cross-country convergence and property right protection), remain promising directions for future research.

The paper next considered how firms may influence, and be influenced by, the advance of artificial intelligence, with further implications for understanding macroeconomic outcomes. We considered diverse issues of market structure, sectoral reallocations, and firms' organizational structure. Among the insights here we see that A.I. may in part discourage future innovation by speeding up imitation; similarly, rapid creative destruction, by limiting the returns to an innovation, may impose its own limit on the growth process. From an organizational perspective, we also conjectured that while A.I. should be skill-biased for the economy as a whole, more A.I.-intensive firms are likely to: (i) outsource a higher fraction of low-occupation tasks to other firms, and; (ii) pay a higher premium to the low-occupation workers they keep inside the firm.

Finally, we examined sectoral-level evidence regarding the evolution of capital shares in tandem with automation. Consistent with increases in the aggregate capital share, the capital share also appears to be rising in many sectors (especially outside services), which is broadly consistent with an automation story. At the same time, evidence linking these patterns to specific measures of automation at the sectoral level appears weak, and overall there are many economic forces at work in the capital share trends. Developing sharper measures of automation and investigating the role of automation in the capital share dynamics are additional, important avenues for further research.
