SOURCE_ID: forethought-intelligence-explosion
AUTHOR: William MacAskill & Fin Moorhouse (Forethought)
TITLE: Preparing for the Intelligence Explosion
YEAR: 2025
TYPE: report
URL: https://www.forethought.org/research/preparing-for-the-intelligence-explosion
NOTE: PARTIAL - Abstract, Sections 1-4 (including 'Economic concentration' and 'Abundance') captured nearly in full; Sections 5-8 and references abridged/omitted.
====

ABSTRACT
AI that can accelerate research could drive a century of technological progress over just a few years. During such a period, new technological or political developments will raise consequential and hard-to-reverse decisions, in rapid succession. We call these developments grand challenges. These challenges include new weapons of mass destruction, AI-enabled autocracies, races to grab offworld resources, and digital beings worthy of moral consideration, as well as opportunities to dramatically improve quality of life and collective decision-making. We argue that these challenges cannot always be delegated to future AI systems, and suggest things we can do today to meaningfully improve our prospects. AGI preparedness is therefore not just about ensuring that advanced AI systems are aligned: we should be preparing, now, for the disorienting range of developments an intelligence explosion would bring.

1. INTRODUCTION
There's now a serious chance we will see AI far smarter than humans within the coming decade... The development of AI that can meaningfully substitute for human research labour would probably drive very rapid technological development, compressing decades of scientific, technological and intellectual development into years or months. This will of course bring the potential for enormously improving quality of life... It could mean medical advances which drastically extend our healthy lifespans, enough material abundance to give everyone a lifestyle that today's billionaires would envy, and tools for unprecedented levels of coordination, cooperation, and competent governance.

But it would also pose a formidable range of challenges... Because of the accelerated pace of change from the intelligence explosion, the world will need to handle these challenges fast, on a timescale far shorter than what human institutions are designed for. By default, we simply won't have time for extended deliberation and slow trial and error.

2. A CENTURY IN A DECADE
[Thought experiment: all 1925-2025 developments compressed into 1925-1935; nuclear decisions on 10x speed; Cuban Missile Crisis lasting 31 hours.] "Such a rapid pace would have changed what decisions were made."
Asymmetric acceleration: "technological change doesn't speed up everything equally: accelerating technological progress is like slowing the processes which don't accelerate along with it. In particular, it's hard to speed up humans themselves, and their interactions, thoughts, and learning. Similarly, many social and political institutions have rigid schedules, which could drag behind as the rest of the world speeds up around them."
"good decision-making will still be bottlenecked by the speed of human brains and pace of institutional schedules, and the usual method of institutional learning via trial and error on the timescale of human lifetimes will be too slow."

3. THE INTELLIGENCE EXPLOSION AND BEYOND
The argument, in brief: "Currently, total global research effort grows slowly, increasing at less than 5% per year. But total AI cognitive labour is growing more than 500x faster than total human cognitive labour... once total AI cognitive labour starts to rival total human cognitive labour, the growth rate of overall cognitive labour will increase massively. That will drive faster technological progress."
Key drivers: training compute (4.5x/yr), algorithmic efficiency in training (~3x/yr), post-training enhancements (~3x/yr) => effective training compute >10x/yr; inference efficiency ~10x/yr; inference compute ~2.5x/yr => 'AI population' could grow ~25x/yr.
Limits: training compute can scale ~another 10,000x before power limits; algorithmic efficiency a further 1,000x over a decade; inference compute 10,000x. "The product of training compute, algorithmic efficiency, and inference compute — which combine to give AI research effort — will then have increased one hundred billion-fold (1e11), averaging just over 10x per year."
Software feedback loop: "reasonable estimates suggest a roughly even chance that an AI-driven software feedback loop would drive accelerating progress in AI performance and efficiency." LLMs currently learn ~100,000x less efficiently than human brains, so large headroom.
"Putting this all together, we can conclude that even if current rates of AI progress slow by a factor of 100x compared to current trends, total cognitive research labour... will still grow far more rapidly than before."

AI-human cognitive parity: "It seems likely to us that AI research effort will reach parity with human research labour within the next two decades... AI could even approach human parity well within the coming decade... AI-human parity could arrive in a matter of years." [GPQA: from random guessing to beating PhD experts in 18 months; METR: maximum duration of ML tasks doubling every ~7 months; "within three to six years, AI models will become capable of automating many cognitive tasks which take human experts up to a month."]
"So we might start with an effective population of, say, one hundred thousand human expert-level AI researchers... rapidly outsmarting all roughly ten million working human researchers, then all 8 billion living humans, before then doubling in collective capabilities many times over again."

The technology explosion: "In order to drive a century in a decade, total research effort would need to increase by a factor of 600 or more over that decade... On our conservative scenario... total research effort would increase by a factor of 1e7, or about 5x per year. This would be enough to drive over three hundred years' worth of technological development on current rates of progress." Physical experiments, capital, and serial-time constraints are headwinds, but "even taking into account headwinds arising from physical experiments and physical capital, we think a century of technological progress in a decade — or far more — is more likely than not."

The industrial explosion: "To date, machines have already automated manufacturing tasks which previously relied on lots of human labour. In the past, however, human labour always complemented machines: human labour eventually bottlenecks output as you stockpile more and more machines... But if human-level AI and dextrous robots can substitute for almost all skilled human labour, things would be very different. The material economy could autonomously make and assemble the parts required for more key parts of the material economy... The result is an industrial base which grows itself... To recap: in manufacturing today, humans make things with their hands, or they supervise computer-controlled machines and robots. But after a technology explosion, AI could replace human guidance, and robots could replace human hands. The main bottleneck to rapid industrial growth — human labour — melts away."
"Industrial production could then accelerate to very rapid peak growth rates. Based on current rates of manufacturing factories and robots, output could double every few years or even months." Energy overhang: capturing solar on <2% of oceans/deserts could raise primary energy 100x; space-based solar a billion times more.

4. GRAND CHALLENGES
[List includes AI takeover; highly destructive technologies (bioweapons, drone swarms, huge nuclear arsenals, atomically precise manufacturing); power-concentrating mechanisms; value lock-in; AI agents and digital minds; space governance; new competitive pressures; epistemic disruption; abundance; unknown unknowns.]

Power-concentrating mechanisms / Economic concentration:
"AI-driven explosive growth could result in an even smaller fraction of people (or companies, or countries) holding an even larger fraction of wealth. If the labour share shrinks significantly, then without redistribution most income would come from rents on capital and land, so surplus from growth would disproportionately fall to the owners of capital and land, and it would become increasingly hard for anyone else to claw back relative influence through hard work. Such ownership is already much more unevenly concentrated than income. Moreover, explosive growth could increase the relative differences in different economies' growth rates, and then shorten the time it takes for one country to outgrow another. If growth over this period is super-exponential, then a small initial lead would become proportionally larger over time..."
First mover advantages: "Countries or companies at the technological frontier could convert their temporary advantage into permanent dominance by seizing on unexploited sources of power... Such strategies, deployed by an early leader, could create barriers to competition so substantial that catching up becomes practically impossible for later entrants."

Abundance:
"Radical shared abundance. An intelligence explosion could cause huge gains in material wealth and income... Quantitatively, we might expect a century's worth of technological progress to more than double average incomes; abundant AI and robotic labour from an industrial explosion could dramatically increase that again, with the potential for thousands of AI and robot assistants per person, if people choose to have that... But radical and shared abundance isn't guaranteed. For instance, an intelligence explosion could lead to huge gains in wealth which are concentrated in only a few hands. Or countries could impose regulations which limit levels of resulting abundance, especially in cases where entrenched interests oppose AI-driven growth, or where most beneficiaries don't exist yet."
"Safety from rising incomes. Empirically, rising incomes seem to make society invest more in safety, decrease the likelihood of war, and increase the likelihood of democratising political institutions..."

Value erosion (new competitive pressures): "AI systems render human participation increasingly unnecessary for functioning governments, cultures, and economies. As such, humans might incrementally and voluntarily hand over influence to AI systems more competent than humans, but the cumulative effect is to erode human influence and control."

[Sections 5-8 (when challenges can be deferred to aligned superintelligence; AGI preparedness measures; taking stock; conclusion) omitted.]
